# Java-Based-Simple-Encryption-Algorithm
A Java Based Encryption Algorithm designed combining Multiple Techniques
The key generation works as follows. 
•	The user is prompted to enter a password of length ranging between 10 and 40 characters without the use of special characters. The password is read using a Scanner class and the password is checked for the required length using a condition checker and passed down to the transposition cipher to produce a ciphertext.
•	The ciphertext is then read and added to a matrix with 7 characters a row. This is a pre-defined value in the program and includes the word “encrypt”. The produced ciphertext is then added to a matrix of length of the word encrypt. The number of rows depend on the length of the sentence. The author has implemented a function to limit the values to reduce the size of the matrix. The function drops/discards the characters of the password if they leave empty spaces in the matrix. 

Ex: If the password is 14 characters long, the password is added to the matrix as follows.
       12345678901011
E	N	C	R	Y	P	T
1	2	3	4	5	6	7
8	9	0	1	0	1	1
   
•	If the password is 10 characters long, the password is added to the matrix as follows.
      1234567890

E	N	C	R	Y	P	T
1	2	3	4	5	6	7
8	9	0				

•	The function drops the last few digits of the password to limit the matrix size to 7 characters. 

E	N	C	R	Y	P	T
1	2	3	4	5	6	7

•	Then, the word “ENCRYPT” is arranged according to the Alphabetical order; i.e. “CENPRTY” and re-written to the matrix. The columns belonging to the respective Alphabet also re-arranges its position. The new matrix will look like this.

C	E	N	P	R	T	Y
3	1	2	6	4	7	5
 
•	The values are then read alongside the row and printed as the final ciphertext. 
Ex: 3126475

	The encryption process includes a key generated 
1.	By hashing the output from the transposition cipher 
2.	By hashing the output from the shift cipher followed by a transposition cipher.
3.	
•	The algorithm consist of multiple key generation procedure, where the above two hash functions are used for the key generation process. 
•	1st key is produced by adding the hash values of the output of transposition cipher and the hash value of the output of shift cipher followed by the transposition cipher and obtaining the modulus of the product by 15. Then, a condition checker checks whether the output value is (-) negative or (+) positive. If (-) negative, the value is converted to a (+) positive value.
•	2nd key is generated by hashing the value of shift cipher followed by a transposition cipher divided by 2. If the hash value divided by 2 equals to zero, use the value to produce a key by hashing with modulus 20.  If the hash value divided by 2 not equals to zero, add 1 and obtain the key by hashing with modulus 20. Following the above procedure will output one value, regardless of the remainder produced during the calculation.
•	3rd key is a basic key, which consist the total of the hash values of the 1st key and the 2nd key.  

The encryption algorithm works as follows
•	The user is prompted to input the plaintext and the hash value generated is used as the password to encrypt. The user input is converted to char data type and the char values are added together. A for loop declared with a variable which is restricted to the length of the password, so that all the characters in the file is read using .length () function. 
•	The read plaintext is then converted to char using charAt () function. The algorithm is implemented in a way that all the alpha-numeric characters are encoded, leaving symbols and special-characters as they are in the plain text.
•	 Considering the numerical values, the Character.isDigit () function checks for all the available numerals and increments a variable used to store the char values of the plaintext. The variable storing the char values is assigned the modulus obtained by the sum of char values of the password modulus by 10. Afterwards, if the value of the variable is checked and if it is greater than 9, 10 is subtracted; as there are 10 numeric characters. 
•	The alphabetical characters are checked in two separate functions for uppercase and lowercase characters. If the character is an uppercase character, the  Character.isUpperCase () function passes it down and the variable holding the character is replaced with the value of character in char data type + char values of the password modulus by 26. If the character is an uppercase and if the variable has a value greater than 26, a total of 26 is subtracted from the sum of the variable; as the alphabet has a count of 26. The same procedure is followed for lowercase characters, where the function Character.isLowerCase () is utilized. 
•	The produced ciphertext is printed; where the variable holding the values type-casted to char data type.
The decryption algorithm works as follows.
•	The user is prompted to input the ciphertext and the hash value generated is used as the password to decrypt. The user input is converted to char data type and the char values are added together. A for loop declared with a variable which is restricted to the length of the password, so that all the characters in the file is read using .length () function. 
•	The read ciphertext is then converted to char using charAt () function. The algorithm is implemented in a way that all the alpha-numeric characters are encoded, leaving symbols and special-characters as they are in the ciphertext.
•	 Considering the numerical values, the Character.isDigit () function checks for all the available numerals and decrements a variable used to store the char values of the plaintext. The variable storing the char values is assigned the modulus obtained by the sum of char values of the password modulus by 10. Afterwards, if the value of the variable is checked and if it is less than 0, 10 is added; as there are 10 numeric characters. 
•	The alphabetical characters are checked in two separate functions for uppercase and lowercase characters. If the character is an uppercase character, the  Character.isUpperCase () function passes it down and the variable holding the character is replaced with the value of character in char data type - char values of the password modulus by 26. If the character is an uppercase and if the variable has a value less than 26, a total of 26 is added to the sum of the variable; as the alphabet has a count of 26. The same procedure is followed for lowercase characters, where the function Character.isLowerCase () is utilized. 
•	The produced plaintext is printed; where the variable holding the values type-casted to char data type.

